docs: rework disappearance guide to provide more guidance (#499)
testing-library/testing-library-docs: docs/guide-disappearance.md

title: Appearance and Disappearance
---

Sometimes you need to test that an element is present and then disappears or the
other way around.

## Waiting for appearance

If you need to wait for an element to appear, [`findBy`][find-by] and the [async
wait utility][async-api] `waitFor` allow you to wait for an assertion to be
satisfied before proceeding. The wait utilities retry until the query passes or
times out.

Wait for appearance and return the element using `findBy`:

```javascript
test('movie title appears', async () => {
  // element is initially not present...

  const movieTitle = await screen.findByText('the lion king')
  expect(movieTitle).toBeInTheDocument()
})
```

Or wait for appearance using `waitFor` and `getBy`:

```javascript
test('movie title appears', async () => {
  // element is initially not present...

  await waitFor(() => {
    expect(screen.getByText('the lion king')).toBeInTheDocument()
  })
})
```

These do more or less the same thing (`findBy` uses `waitFor` under the hood),

> but the `findBy` version results in simpler code and a better error message.

Reviewer: Okay, this is interesting.

I'm not sure I agree on the statement (I believe using `waitFor` is more explicit, and helps the test conveying meaning) but that's entirely personal. The question here is whether if docs should showcase two ways of doing the same thing 🤔 

If we agree on `findBy` being simpler and packed with a better error message, then I'd say this is the way docs should suggest 👍 

`waitFor` is useful for other stuff (such as waiting for XHR requests to happen, or other). It might appear somewhere else in docs.

Reviewer: I think this is the last bit that needs some attention, then we can merge!

> These do more or less the same thing (`findBy` uses `waitFor` under the hood),
> but the `findBy` version results in simpler code and a better error message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These do more or less the same thing (`findBy` uses `waitFor` under the hood),
but the `findBy` version produces errors more like a `getBy` query,
instead of a general-purpose timeout error.
```

_Note: `toBeInTheDocument()` comes from [`@testing-library/jest-dom`][jest-dom]_

## Waiting for disappearance

When you want to wait until an element has disappeared, you can use
`waitForElementToBeRemoved`.

The `waitForElementToBeRemoved` [async wait utility][async-api] takes an element
as an argument and waits until that element has been removed from the document.

```javascript
test('movie title no longer present in document', async () => {
  // element is present
  const movie = screen.queryByText('the mummy')

>   await waitForElementToBeRemoved(movie)

Author: I see @kentcdodds commented over here that this should receive a callback, not the element directly: https://github.com/testing-library/react-testing-library/issues/673#issuecomment-643706909

I feel like I've seen that doing it this way works too though, so I'm not sure.

Reviewer: It can either receive a callback, an element, or an array of elements:

https://github.com/testing-library/dom-testing-library/blob/master/types/__tests__/type-tests.ts#L158-L164

Reviewer 2: might be worth expanding on this section later with a note about working with React, because sometimes the node gets destroyed and replaced, making these types of tests either pass or fail when they shouldn't

  // element has been removed
  expect(movie).not.toBeInTheDocument()
})
```

> `waitForElementToBeRemoved` works by using a

Reviewer 2: I think the `waitFor` style should also be documented here, particularly for working with React, when the node reference itself is unstable but a retryable query inside a callback would work.

[`MutationObserver`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MutationObserver)
internally, which means it responds to the element being removed in a very
efficient way.

You can also pass an array or a callback to `waitForElementToBeRemoved` -
[see the documentation for more options](dom-testing-library/api-async.md#waitforelementtoberemoved).

## Asserting elements are not present

> As opposed to waiting for removal, this is for when you are at a point in your
> test where you know an element shouldn't be present.

Reviewer 2: This section can be tightened up. It's unclear what "this" refers to here. Also, we shouldn't assume jest-dom is installed and should mention the `null` check.

```suggestion
If you want to assert that an element is not present _right now_, 
rather than testing that it is present and will disappear, use
`queryBy` instead of `getBy` for the query, and then assert that
nothing was found. 
```

title: Appearance and Disappearance
---

Sometimes you need to test that an element is present and then disappears or the
other way around.

## Waiting for appearance

If you need to wait for an element to appear, [`findBy`][find-by] and the [async
wait utility][async-api] `waitFor` allow you to wait for an assertion to be
satisfied before proceeding. The wait utilities retry until the query passes or
times out.

Wait for appearance and return the element using `findBy`:

```javascript
test('movie title appears', async () => {

>   // element is initially not present...

Reviewer 3: Maybe add an extra assertion to check that it's not present initially?
```js
// element is initially not present...
expect(movieTitle).not.toBeInTheDocument()
```

Author: Maybe, but I feel that isn't entirely relevant and detracts a little from what we're trying to show in this example. Also, asserting that things don't exist is covered further down on the page.

If we did do that though, there should also be code here to do something that would make the title appear after asserting it isn't here, and I'm not sure it makes sense to get into that here.

We could add a comment saying as much after the assertion, like this:

```suggestion
  expect(screen.queryByText('the lion king')).not.toBeInTheDocument()
  
  // pretend we do something here that should make the title appear
```

But I think it might be better to alter the comment in the test to something that makes it clearer that this would be part of a longer test:

```suggestion
  // ...code setting up a page that will eventually contain a movie title

```

Do you think the last suggestion would help, or is there maybe something else we could do to alleviate the confusion or lack of clarity we are hoping to fix by adding this assertion?

Reviewer 3: I think the first suggestion is much clearer instead of changing the comment tbh

Reviewer 3: On the other hand, you're right with not wanting to have things in here that you'll explain later, so maybe the changed comment is indeed a better option to go with here...

Maybe we can make a full example (like the second suggestion) later on the page? 🤔

Author: >I think the first suggestion is much clearer instead of changing the comment tbh

Fair! In your mind, what is it that is unclear that adding this assertion solves? Or is there something else that makes it so you want it to be added?

Reviewer 3: On the other hand, you're right with not wanting to have things in here that you'll explain later, so maybe the changed comment is indeed a better option to go with here...

Maybe we can make a full example (like the second suggestion) later on the page? 🤔

Reviewer 2: I think there's value in keeping the first examples minimal, without having to decipher fake application code. Expanding on the comment and making clear this is a snippet of a larger test should be good.

  const movieTitle = await screen.findByText('the lion king')
  expect(movieTitle).toBeInTheDocument()
})
```

Or wait for appearance using `waitFor` and `getBy`:

```javascript
test('movie title appears', async () => {

>   // element is initially not present...

Reviewer 3: Same

  await waitFor(() => {
    expect(screen.getByText('the lion king')).toBeInTheDocument()
  })
})
```

These do more or less the same thing (`findBy` uses `waitFor` under the hood),
but the `findBy` version results in simpler code and a better error message.

_Note: `toBeInTheDocument()` comes from [`@testing-library/jest-dom`][jest-dom]_

## Waiting for disappearance

When you want to wait until an element has disappeared, you can use
`waitForElementToBeRemoved` or `waitFor`.

The `waitForElementToBeRemoved` [async wait utility][async-api] takes an element
as an argument and waits until that element has been removed from the document.

```javascript
test('movie title no longer present in document', async () => {
  // element is present

>   const movie = screen.queryByText('the mummy')

Reviewer 3: Maybe add an extra assertion to check that it is present initially?

  await waitForElementToBeRemoved(movie)

  // element has been removed
  expect(movie).not.toBeInTheDocument()
})
```

`waitForElementToBeRemoved` works by using a
[`MutationObserver`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MutationObserver)
internally, which means it responds to the element being removed in a very
efficient way.

You can also pass an array or a callback to `waitForElementToBeRemoved` -
[see the documentation for more options](dom-testing-library/api-async.md#waitforelementtoberemoved).

Another option is using the `waitFor` helper.

The `waitFor` [async wait utility][async-api] retries until the wrapped function
stops throwing an error. Because expectations throw errors when they fail,
putting one in the wrapped function can be used to wait for the element to be
removed.

```javascript
test('movie title goes away', async () => {

>   // element is initially present...

Reviewer 3: Same

title: Appearance and Disappearance
---

Sometimes you need to test that an element is present and then disappears or the
other way around.

## Waiting for appearance

If you need to wait for an element to appear, [`findBy`][find-by] and the [async
wait utility][async-api] `waitFor` allow you to wait for an assertion to be
satisfied before proceeding. The wait utilities retry until the query passes or
times out.

Wait for appearance and return the element using `findBy`:

```javascript
test('movie title appears', async () => {
  // element is initially not present...

  const movieTitle = await screen.findByText('the lion king')
  expect(movieTitle).toBeInTheDocument()
})
```

Or wait for appearance using `waitFor` and `getBy`:

```javascript
test('movie title appears', async () => {
  // element is initially not present...

  await waitFor(() => {
    expect(screen.getByText('the lion king')).toBeInTheDocument()
  })
})
```

These do more or less the same thing (`findBy` uses `waitFor` under the hood),
but the `findBy` version results in simpler code and a better error message.

> _Note: `toBeInTheDocument()` comes from [`@testing-library/jest-dom`][jest-dom]_

Reviewer: Neat!

  await waitForElementToBeRemoved(movie)

  // element has been removed
  expect(movie).not.toBeInTheDocument()
})
```

`waitForElementToBeRemoved` works by using a
[`MutationObserver`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MutationObserver)
internally, which means it responds to the element being removed in a very
efficient way.

You can also pass an array or a callback to `waitForElementToBeRemoved` -
[see the documentation for more options](dom-testing-library/api-async.md#waitforelementtoberemoved).

Another option is using the `waitFor` helper.

The `waitFor` [async wait utility][async-api] retries until the wrapped function
stops throwing an error. Because expectations throw errors when they fail,
putting one in the wrapped function can be used to wait for the element to be
removed.

```javascript
test('movie title goes away', async () => {
  // element is initially present...
  // note use of queryBy instead of getBy to return null
  // instead of throwing in the query itself
  await waitFor(() => {
    expect(screen.queryByText('i, robot')).not.toBeInTheDocument()
  })
})
```

Polling like this is not as efficient as observing for mutations using

> `waitForElementToBeRemoved`, but sometimes it's the best option.

Author: Are there any good examples of when `waitFor` would work an `waitForElementToBeRemoved` wouldn't in this context? If not, then maybe it shouldn't have equal space on this page.

Reviewer: agree 👍 

If not, I wouldn't even mention a "negated" `waitFor` as an alternative to `waitForElementToBeRemoved`

Author: I agree, I've removed the `waitFor` option here ✨

> `waitForElementToBeRemoved`, but sometimes it's the best option.

Reviewer: Could we explain when it is the best option?

## Asserting elements are not present

As opposed to waiting for removal, this is for when you are at a point in your
test where you know an element shouldn't be present.

> You might reach for `getBy` to check that something is not present, but `getBy`
> queries throw an error when they can't find an element, which means you don't
> get the chance to use the result in an expectation. If you want to make an
> assertion that an element is _not_ present in the document, you can use
> `queryBy` queries instead:

Reviewer: I'd use more strong language here:

```suggestion
You might reach for `getBy` to check that something is not present, but `getBy`
queries throw an error when they can't find an element. If you want to make an
assertion that an element is _not_ present in the document, you need to use
`queryBy` queries instead:
```

Author: I'm not sure I understand how removing that clause results in stronger language, but I'm fine with the change.

Reviewer: Oh, the change was from "you can use" to "you need to". Then I noticed the clause was kinda redundant so I merged both changes. Sorry if that wasn't clear!

Author: Ah, I didn't even notice that change from "can" to "need". Makes more sense now!

```javascript
const submitButton = screen.queryByText('submit')
expect(submitButton).not.toBeInTheDocument() // it doesn't exist in the document
```

The `queryAll` query methods return an array of matching elements. The length of
the array can be useful for assertions after elements are added or removed from
the document.

```javascript
const submitButtons = screen.queryAllByText('submit')
expect(submitButtons).toHaveLength(2) // expect 2 elements
```

_Note: `not.toBeInTheDocument()` comes from
[`@testing-library/jest-dom`][jest-dom]_

## The `toBeInTheDocument()` matcher

The [`@testing-library/jest-dom`][jest-dom] utility library provides the
`.toBeInTheDocument()` matcher, which can be used to assert that an element is
in the body of the document, or not. This can be more meaningful than asserting
a query result is `null`, and it also provides more helpful error messages when
your tests fail.

```javascript
// use `queryBy` to avoid throwing an error with `getBy`
const submitButton = screen.queryByText('submit')
expect(submitButton).not.toBeInTheDocument()
```

> Read about how to set this up [in the documentation](jest-dom).

Author: Oops, used the wrong kind of markdown link here.

```suggestion
Read about how to set this up [in the jest-dom documentation][jest-dom].
```
